# Connecting concepts

## Formulating first steps

In logic an argument is a sequence of statements demonstrating the truth of an
assertion. The form of the argument is separate from the content of the
argument. The truth of an argument necessarily follows from its form.

1. If $$x^2 = 25$$ then either $$x = 5$$ or $$x = -5$$.
1. x cannot be negative.
1. Therefore, $$x = 5$$.

This may be a trivial set of statements, but consider the next argument too.

1. When an article is submitted, it is either published or sent back for further editing.
1. A submitted article was not sent back for further editing.
1. Therefore, the article was published.

These arguments are about different topics, but they are of the same form. Both
are *disjunctive syllogisms*. Arguments of the form:

1. *P* or *Q*.
1. Not *Q*.
1. Therefore *P*.

Previously we saw an example of the Modus Ponens argument. Modus ponens
arguments have the form:

1. If *P* then *Q*.
1. *P*
1. Therefore *Q*.

## Producing propositions

Arguments are composed of propositions. Propositions may be true or false but
not both at the same time. "$$1 + 1 = 2$$" is a true proposition. While,
contrary to English teachers and management gurus "$$1 + 1 = 3$$" is a false
proposition.

Some propositions depend on terms references within the proposition: "The car
is red". The truth of the sentence depends on which car is being referred to.
If the car in question is indeed red, then it is true. Otherwise it is false.
If the the context is unclear, it is not a productive proposition.

## Compound compositions

Formal logic was developed to be intuitive when communicating carefully. Thus,
in language sophisticated sentences are composed of simpler statements.
Similarly complex propositions can be constructed from plainer propositions.
often when translating from language to logic, it is useful to break down these
sentences into simple propositions that are related through _logical
connectives_.

Connectives that compose complex concepts commonly correspond to _conjunctions_
in natural language: e.g. and, and or. However, the simplest _connective_ is
not a conjunction, it's the negation, the adverb _not_.

With the _logical connectives_ _and_, _or_ and _not_ all logical propositions
and formulas can be expressed and composed. Together the three connectives are
considered a _complete set of connectives_.

