# Highlights from history

Humans have been drawing lines in the sand since the dawn of time. Looking at
lines lead to geometry. Famously Pythagoras reasoned about lines, angles and
triangles around 500 BC. However apocryphally he was rather irrational: his
followers threw a man into the sea to keep secret that √2 isn't rational. Yet
somehow, they call the numbers rather than the people irrational.

Socrates, Plato and the sophists were apparently arguing around 400 BC. As a
philosopher Socrates is known more for the his method to stimulate thinking.
Plato is famous for his politics, perception of perfection, rhetoric and
republic. However his contribution to logic was his study of fallacious
arguments. Aristotle rooted in rationalism made reasonable progress on reason
in response to his forebears. He started the systematisation of logical laws of
inference, like modus ponens, a form of deductive reasoning. An example of the
modus ponens:

1. If Clement was born in Singapore, then he is Singaporean.
1. Clement was born in Singapore.
1. Therefore, Clement is Singaporean.

Tools are vital for any craft. Where geometry could be done through drawing and
measurement, the tools for abstract reasoning were less obvious. It's easy to
imagine calculating the root of two is rough with Roman numerals. In the
meantime philosophy, logic and theology were intertwined and progress proceeded
prosaically as the tools for thought slowly developed and percolated throughout
the intellectual world.

Leibniz made symbolic progress around the mid 17th century. He was a great
mathematician, discovering calculus independently of Newton. Others would later
lambaste Leibniz for plagiarising Newton who is credited as the conventional
creator of calculus; however it's Leibniz rather than Newtonian notation now in
common use. Leibniz's leap was his understanding that representation is
relevant to human thought, and the idea that much reasoning could be reduced to
mathematical calculation.

Around 2000 years after Aristotle, George Boole burst onto the scene. Before
Boole logicians were mostly reasoning in rhetoric. Now this may seem simply
self-evident. But Boole proposed a process with more pros than prose, symbolic
logic. Rigorous mathematical logic was one of George Boole's great
achievements, he liberated logic from language by fomenting its formalisation.
Boole's eponymous Boolean algebra retired imprecise rambling and relinquished
rhetoric's hold on reason.

