# Defining the domain of logic

Before getting started it helps to highlight what logic is, why it was
developed, and how to apply it correctly.

Logic is not the art of persuasion. Socrates and Plato recognised the
relationship between truth and persuasion. The ancient Sophists could seemingly
win any argument through their words, at the expense of the truth. They could
turn truth into lies; and lies into truth.

Truth and the pursuit of it might be unfashionable concepts nowadays; however,
Logic was developed as a set of rules in search of the truth. It is a tool to
differentiate truth from lies. At the very least, we can use it to be less
wrong.

## The existence of truth

If the existence of truth is not accepted, meaning collapses and everything
collapses into incoherence. Consider the following statement:

> Nothing is true.

Think about it for a second. Is the statement true? There are only two options,
either the statement is true or it's false. If the statement is false, then the
truth exists. If however, the statement is true then the statement itself is
true, and therefore false. It's self refuting!

Conversely, consider the proposition:

> Everything is true.

Now think about that for a moment. If the statement is false, then not
everything is true. However, if everything is true then the opposite, nothing,
is true too. This assertion is also contradictory. We can conclude that not
everything is true.

## Properties of truth

For the purposes of the discussion the following are taken to be properties of
truth.

* *Truth is exclusive* - Once the truth of a claim is established, mutually
  exclusive claims are known to be false. If we accept $$1 + 1 = 2$$. We know
  that $$1 + 1 \neq 3$$.
* *Truth is consistent* - The truth does not contradict itself. A proposition
  found to be true will not contradict other claims known to be true.

There are other attractive properties that truth should satisfy. For instance,
Truth should cohere with and match reality. It should also have explanatory
power and make predictions that are also true. The truth should be robust. It
should be able to withstand questioning and scrutiny. However these are
philosophical considerations and are outside the scope of our discussion.

## The limits of logic

Sometimes an argument can be considered logically valid but still be incorrect.
An example of this is the following argument. 

1. All birds with wings can fly.
1. Ostriches are birds with wings.
1. Therefore, ostriches can fly.

The conclusion $$(3)$$ is a consequence of its premises $$(1)$$ and $$(2)$$, so
it is logically valid. However, not all birds with wings can fly, so $$(1)$$ is
untrue. The argument is therefore philosophically false. Arguments where the
base assumptions are false are called unsound arguments.

To further push the point. The following is an argument that was copied from a
Wikipedia article used in a highly controversial debate. Without the intention
of provoking a holy war, the following is an argument where the conclusion is a
logical consequence of its premises, so it is considered a logically valid
argument.

1. It is wrong to kill innocent human beings.
1. The embryo is an innocent human being.
1. Hence it is wrong to kill the embryo.

Parties opposed to this position argue that either $$(1)$$, $$(2)$$, or both
are false. If so, the argument would be unsound. However, that is not within
the remit of reason alone.

Controversy aside, this gives us clues to validate truth claims.
