# Defining the dominion of logic

Before getting started it helps to highlight what logic is, why it was
developed, and how to apply it correctly.

Socrates and Plato recognised the relationship between truth and persuasion.
However as persuasive as Socrates may have been, logic is not the art of
persuasion. The ancient Sophists could seemingly win any argument through their
words, at the expense of the truth. They could turn truth into lies; and lies
into truth. Plato articulated the atrociousness of their arguments.

Truth and the pursuit of it might be unfashionable concepts nowadays. The
philosophy of mathematics and logic can be complicated; however, logic was
developed as a set of rules in search of the truth. It is a tool to
differentiate truth from lies. The analysis and appraisal of arguments.

## Existence of truth

If the existence of truth is not accepted, meaning collapses and everything
crumbles into incoherence. Consider the following statement:

> Nothing is true.

Think about it for a second. Is the statement true? There are only two options,
either the statement is true or it's false. If the statement is false, then the
truth exists. If however, the statement is true then the statement itself is
true, and therefore false. It's self refuting!

Conversely, consider the proposition:

> Everything is true.

Now think about that for a moment. If the statement is false, then not
everything is true. However, if everything is true then the opposite, nothing,
is true too. This assertion is also contradictory. We can conclude that not
everything is true.

## Trappings of truth

For the purposes of the discussion the following are taken to be properties of
truth.

* *Truth is exclusive* - Once the truth of a claim is established, mutually
  exclusive claims are known to be false. If we accept $$1 + 1 = 2$$. We know
  that $$1 + 1 \neq 3$$.
* *Truth is consistent* - The truth does not contradict itself. A proposition
  found to be true will not contradict other claims known to be true.

There are other attractive properties that truth should satisfy. For instance,
truth should be coherent. It should correspond with and match reality. It
should also have explanatory power and make predictions that are also true. The
truth should be robust. It should be able to withstand challenges, questioning
and scrutiny. However these are philosophical considerations and are not wholly
in the scope of our discussion.

## Limits of logic

Sometimes an argument can be considered logically valid but still be incorrect.
An example of this is the following argument.

1. All birds with wings can fly.
1. Ostriches are birds with wings.
1. Therefore, ostriches can fly.

The conclusion $$(3)$$ is a consequence of its premises $$(1)$$ and $$(2)$$, so
it is logically valid. However, not all birds with wings can fly, so $$(1)$$ is
untrue. The argument is therefore philosophically false. Arguments where the
base assumptions are false lead to false conclusions and are called unsound
arguments.

To further push the point. The following syllogism is used in a highly
contentious and controversial debate. Without the intention of continuing a
holy war here, the following is an argument whose conclusion is a logical
consequence of its premises. Hence it is considered a logically valid argument.

1. It is wrong to kill innocent human beings.
1. Abortion is the killing of a foetus.
1. A foetus is an innocent human being.
1. Hence it is abortion is wrong.

Parties opposed to this position argue that either $$(1)$$, $$(2)$$, $$(3)$$,
or any combination of more than one the above propositions are false. If so,
the argument would be unsound. However, that is not within the remit of reason
alone.

Controversy aside, this gives us clues on how to validate claims. We can take
what we believe to be true to their logical conclusions. When the consequences
of our presuppositions leads to questionable or contradictory conclusions then
it is worth re-examining our assumptions.
