# Obstacles to objectivity

When following beliefs lead to questionable conclusions, it may pay to
re-inspect them. Humans and institutions are renowned for their resistance to
rectification. History is besmirched with the bodies of bad ideas based on
problematic preconceptions.

By far the most common example of this is Galileo. He possibly had personality
problems. Due to his strong emotion to turn the scientific tides of his day,
his tidal *'proof'* of the motion of the earth was incorrect. However, through
his telescopes he showed the Copernican heliocentric model of the solar system
to be true as the establishment of his day falsely clung to their geocentric
epicycles.

Between 1877 to 1887 Michelson and Morley repeatedly attempted to measure the
speed of light travelling in perpendicular directions to measure the absolute
frame of reference, the aether. Due to the movement of the earth, they expected
to measure different speeds. They believed their experiments failed as the
speed of light was measured to be constant. Their results were right, however
their assumptions were not.

Refusing to take the results lightly led Einstein to Special Relativity. The
absolutes of time and space assumed by Newton and the prevailing aether
assumption of the early 20th century were replaced by the absolute of the speed
of light.

Later in life, unsettled by the implications of quantum mechanics, Einstein
famously declared *God is not playing at dice* and did not accept it. He
unsuccessfully tried to disprove the theory he helped hypothesise until his
death.

History has decisively demonstrated human intransigence. Often people favour and
recall information that only reinforces their own beliefs. When faced with data
that contradicts their beliefs many would rather distort reality than to face
up to it. Psychology has graciously bequeathed us with terms for these
phenomena: confirmation bias and cognitive dissonance.

Yet that is not to say that obstinate people are necessarily incorrect either.
Only that feeling is not the decisive determinant of truth. To correctly refute
an argument, the falsehood of either the assumptions or the reasoning must be
shown to be incorrect.
