# Starting from sound suppositions

Arguments are based on prior assumptions. In current philosophy, there are many
opinions on what it means for a logical or mathematical statement to be true.
However, the ancients believed these presuppositions ought to be self-evident;
true without needing explanation.

We have already seen that assuming *everything is true*, or that *nothing is
true* are not useful presuppositions. Not all assertions are accurate. Logical
arguments made from incorrect assumptions lead to incorrect conclusions. The
following are examples of interesting claims that have been postulated.
However, as we shall see consistency is key.

> Only matter exists.

If the statement were true, then the idea of the statement itself, the truth of
the statement, and any other idea would not exist. It is self-refuting.

## Problems with positivism

Positivism was posited in the early 20th century. It was a reductionist
movement that the only source of truth was sensory experience.

They held to the vaunted verification principle. An early formulation was
apparently:

> Only that which can be tested by the five senses could be verified as true.

However the statement cannot be tested by the five senses. It fails its own
test. Logicism sought to reduce physical science to mathematics, and
mathematics to logic. Thanks to Kurt Godel's incompleteness theorems it has
been shown this is impossible. Logical positivism was an intellectual successor
to positivism and Bertrand Russel's logicism. Their formulation of
verificationism was apparently:

> Only statements that are empirically verifiable or mathematically provable
> are meaningful.

However the formulation itself is not empirically verifiable nor mathematically
provable. A.J Ayer a great proponent of the logical positivism movement is
later to have been quoted saying:

>  I wish I had been more consistent. Any iconoclast who brandishes a
>  debunker's sword should be required to demonstrate it publicly on his own
>  beliefs.

## Refuting relativism

A mood that is fairly popular now is relativism. There are many common
formulations of this. Relativism is the idea that all truth is is relative; a
denial of absolutes in reality. Some basic formulations are:

> * Everything is relative.
> * All truth is relative.
> * There are no absolute truths.
> * What's true for you is not true for me.

All the statements are absolute statements. If they're true, then not
everything is relative so the statements are false. Consider the following
sentence:

> It's impossible to know anything.

If that's true, then it's impossible to know whether the statement is true. So
to even state that "*It's impossible to know anything*" is itself impossible to
know is to state it as a known fact. This is an admission that at least one
fact is knowable. It is therefore self-refuting.

The formulations of the statements above led to self-refutation. It may be
possible to modify the statements to be self-consistent. Indeed, a serious
relativist may claim that some statements are outside the scope of relativism.

However, If it is claimed that logic can't be applied to a system of thought,
under what criteria is a system exempt from logic? Arbitrarily exempting a
system from inconvenient investigation is often a tacit admission of its
inherent problems.

On the other hand the relativist may claim that in fact relativism is only
relatively true to their own conceptual framework. By the relativist's own
standards, a person who disagrees is then perfectly entitled to reject
relativism.

Lip-service may be paid to logic but people are often satisfied with their
suppositions. Introducing content counter to their conceptions for curiosity
may be comparatively contentious. However the choice of a priori assumptions
that inform our views are important as they lead to often wildly differing
conclusions. Self-refuting claims make for poor premises for systems aiming for
consistency.
