# Obstacles to objectivity

When pursuing presuppositions progress to pernicious positions, it probably
pays to probe them. History is besmirched with the bodies of bad ideas based on
problematic preconceptions.

Between 1877 to 1887 Michelson and Morley repeatedly attempted to measure the
speed of light travelling in perpendicular directions. Due to the movement of
the earth, they expected to measure different speeds. This was to to measure
the absolute frame of reference, the aether. They repeatedly believed their
experiments failed: the speed of light was measured to be the same in both
beams. In fact, their results were right however their assumptions were not.

Refusing to take the results lightly led Einstein to Special Relativity. The
absolutes of time and space assumed by Newton and the prevailing aether
assumption of the early 20th century were replaced by the absolute of the speed
of light.

Institutions may be renowned for their resistance to rectification. Yet
Galileo, the iconic illustration of institutional inertia had his own
personality problems. Through his telescopes he showed Copernicus to be correct
while the establishment of his day falsely clung to their geocentric epicycles.
However his emotions to turn the tides of his day were so strong, he
accepted an awful argument that tides showed support of the motion of the
earth.

Cherished ideas and prevailing perceptions are not necessarily incorrect
either. Even after the discovery of relativity and quantum theory Newtonian
mechanics still describes the motion of matter marvellously on moderate
measures.

Individual intransigence is not the decisive determinant of truth either.
Later in life, unsettled by its implications Einstein declared *"God is not
playing at dice"* and refused to accept quantum mechanics. He unsuccessfully
tried to disprove the theory he helped hypothesise until his death.

For better or worse, what is really remarkable here is human imagination and
conviction. Airplanes may not have been developed if the Wright brothers had
not had their heads in the clouds.
