# Adducing addled arguments

> To give truth to him who loves it not is to only give him more multiplied
> reasons for misinterpretation.
>
> George MacDonald

The Wright brothers may have invented powered flight by having their heads in
the clouds, but their feet were firmly grounded in reliable analysis. They
succeeded where countless others failed was by working with the law of gravity,
rather than proving the law while breaking themselves. Similarly good arguments
are made working with the laws of logic.

To correctly refute an argument, the falsehood of either the assumptions or the
reasoning must be shown to be incorrect.

To list the faulty techniques people have argued with would be to write the
history of humanity. Some will be simpler to scrutinize once we have started on
symbolic representations of logic. Unfortunately there are still so many that
sit outside that set, we will cover some below.

## Duplicitous deliberations

The following dialogue is from Star Wars Episode III:

> Anakin: If you are not with me, then you are my enemy!
>
> Obi-wan: Only a Sith deals in absolutes.

From this we can conclude that Obi-wan is a secretly a Sith and Yoda of *"Do or
not do, there is no try"* fame is probably one too. No wonder the Jedi are
annihilated and only revived until after their deaths.

If Obi-wan really wanted to avoid assaulting Anakin he could have pointed that
Anakin was falling into a **false dilemma**. If he wanted to persuade Anakin,
he ought to have presented a third option acceptable to both of them.

However a compromise between two opposite positions is not always best either.
In the famous judgement of King Solomon, two women claimed a baby as their own.
King Solomon ordered for the baby to be cut in two and give half of the baby to
each woman. Watching the two women's reactions he ascertained the true mother
of the child. Actually splitting the child in two would be counter-productive.

Psychologically people are susceptible to accepting assertions that may sound
plausible and are repeated often. If no reasoning is forthcoming, it's called a
**proof by assertion** or **argument from repetition**.

An argument must be properly engaged and understood to be correctly refuted. A
common mistake is to misunderstand or misrepresent an argument and refute a
caricature of the argument. This is called a **straw-man** fallacy.

On the other hand, dismissing an argument as absurd or ridiculing the claim
without demonstrating how it is absurd is called an **appeal to the stone**.

A person may instead attack the proponent of the offending claim, in an attempt
at a character assassination. However **ad-hominem** attacks may cast doubt on
a person's character, do not disprove the claim.

Often people favour and recall information that only reinforce prior beliefs.
When faced with data that contradicts conceptions many would rather distort or
disregard reality than reconcile it.

My brother once had a lecturer who said *"I don't know statistics, but I know
they can lie."* This is a classic example of an **argument from ignorance**.
The lecturer does not agree with the conclusion but is too intellectually lazy
to try to disprove it.

If a naive student who took the class consequently used the lecturer's prestige
to refute the original claim, that would be an example of an **appeal to
authority**. The lecturer is of dubious authority, and there is no reasoning
provided.

There many motivations for flawed reasoning. Freud called it *rationalizing*.
Camus condemned *ulterior motives*. It could be naivety or none of the above.
Psychology has graciously bequeathed us with terms for these phenomena:
confirmation bias and cognitive dissonance.

However, to assume a person's beliefs are incorrect by their motives is also
defective reasoning. This is called a **genetic fallacy**. The provenance of a
belief may shed light on an issue. The problem is that the argument is not
assessed on its merits.

Apparently August Kekule apparently discovered the ring shape of the Benzene
molecule after daydreaming about Ouroboros, a snake biting its own tail. The
shape of the molecule is independent of his inspiration.

Combined with an argument whose conclusion is assumed to prove the argument, a
**circular argument**, a person committing the fallacy assumes the argument
is erroneous and seeks to explain it away. An example of this would be *"You
only say that because you're a Sith!"*.

## Perfidious patois

In some cases, the argument appears acceptable but only due to the vagaries of
language. In other cases due to the changing meanings underneath, we can reach
some surprising conclusions.

1. Light illuminates the dark.
1. My bag is light.
1. Therefore my empty bag illuminates the dark.

Unfortunately I do not have a bag made of light. The issue here is linguistic,
*light* in $$(1)$$ has a different meaning to *light* in $$(2)$$. An argument
where the underlying meanings of words shift is called **equivocation**. Also
sometimes a **bait-and-switch**.

In any rigorous study, terms must be defined and adhered to throughout the discussion.

> To use words wrongly and indefinitely is not merely an error in itself, it
> also creates evil in the soul.
>
> Socrates

Due to its inherent ambiguity human natural language is an imperfect medium to
analyse arguments. Symbolic logic is so powerful because it allows logicians to
translate arguments into an abstract form to analyse the validity of the
argument depending on its new form, independently of the linguistic semantics.
