# Refuting regressive rhetoric

If it is claimed that Logic can't be applied to a system of thought, be
cautious.  Why not? If one is allowed to arbitrarily exempt pet systems from
logic, then why is one not allowed to apply logic to a system? Exempting a
system from logic is often a tacit admission of its inherent logical problems.

As argued already, not all assertions are accurate. The following are examples
of interesting claims that have been postulated time. However, as we shall see
consistency is key.

## The problem with logical positivism

Logical positivism was posited in the early 20th century. It was a reductionist
movement that sought to reduce science to mathematics, and mathematics to
logic. Thanks to Kurt Godel's incompleteness theorems it has been shown this is
impossible.

They held to the verification principle, roughly that:

> Only statements that are empirically verifiable or mathematically provable
> are meaningful.

However the original premise is not empirically verifiable nor mathematically
provable. Another formulation was apparently:

> Only that which can be tested by the five senses could be verified as true.

However that statement cannot be tested by the five senses.

A.J Ayer a great proponent of the movement is later to have been quoted saying:

> I wish I had been more consistent. Any iconoclast who brandishes a debunker's
> sword should be required to demonstrate it publicly on his own beliefs.

## Refuting relativism

> Everything is relative/All truth is relative.

Both the statements are absolute statements. If they're true, then not
everything is relative so the statements are false.

> There are no absolute truths.

The statement is an absolute statement, if true then it is an absolute truth.

> It's impossible to know anything definitely.

If that's true, then it's impossible to know whether the statement is true.

> What is true for you is not true for me.

If I believe that to be false, is it true or false?

## A word of caution

People may often pay lip-service to logic but be satisfied with their
suppositions of the world. Introducing content counter to their conceptions for
curiosity may be comparatively contentious. Experience may not be the final
determinant of truth but it would be recommendable to treat feelings with
gentleness and respect.
